Again, as that ever-turning wheel of Dharma is turning and shining like a brilliant sun
through the beautiful wisdom and compassion of our precious teachers, equally, you know,
let our heart's inspiration, you know, turn and flow. And so again, as we begin anything
within the beautiful transcending loom of our practice of study, contemplation and meditation,
connecting with these elements of, you know, our, you know, re-settling into our core motivations
and core practice of our renunciation, our joy, devotion. And then as much as that, really,
the big cause for enlightenment, thinking of enlightenment itself, and sincerely wishing
for ourselves and every living being to attain the state of liberation and true peace. And
then as much as we can connect with our deep trust and confidence in the true goodness
qualities of every aspect of reality.
And so before our practice time today, we have this little time to kind of reflect on
the teachings. And of course, the whole point of reflecting on the teachings is to soften
up our minds and hearts and really connect clearly with our mind and our heart with our
practice. And like, you know, all the great masters have told us, given us some lots of
homework to do, but definitely in said again and again, in order to really realize our
own potential, the really beautiful potential of this truly precious human birth with all
the freedoms and endowments, in order to realize that potential, we really shouldn't dawdle
or hover, you know, in, you know, kind of the state of not really examining our situation
further. So of course, there's looking at our precious human birth, all its freedoms
and endowments. The other thing that kind of really can block us from realizing our
potential is really not looking clearly at impermanence. So right, that's our second
thought that turns the mind toward the Dharma, you know, helps us move past our assumptions
and kind of unrealistic expectations towards not only to see what they are, but see how
they don't really hold up under investigation, and also naturally turn our mind towards what
is reliable, which is ever presently there as a support, which is what? Nothing but our
true nature, right? And so impermanence, even in the time we have, we're, we're giving just
a certain amount of time to talk about this. So it's a really big, big subject. But I guess
my point is, I'll talk a little bit about, you know, kind of reviewing, not just, of
course, it's not just my thoughts, but these are the, what has been handed to us by all
the great lineage masters, you know, in our beautiful lineage as a framework for each
one of us, myself, you, all of us, to really investigate and do these contemplations. So
kind of, I think I'm just going to really for time's sake, go over the main framework
that we're given according to the lineage, you know, according to like the lineage of
Popto Rinpoche, Kempo Seibong Rinpoche, Kempo, Kempo Pauldenshire Rinpoche, Dodger Rinpoche,
just to name a few, right? So we've all heard and we've all seen to some degree, everything
is impermanent. Nothing is permanent. And one of the main ways that can really hit us
home is really realizing our own mortality, that each one of us is going to die. Each
one of us will pass away, really feel that in our hearts, again, not just to be stuck
there, but to just realize truly like deeply in our bones in our heart, that that's just
a fact of life. And we have the beautiful Dharma and these other practices which are
helping soften our assumptions that we're always going to be here. Things are always
going to be the same to what's more true and more reliable for us to kind of rest our awareness
and our experience within, right? So then within that, you know, the masters give us kind of
these three main ways of just doing some investigation, each one of us. So there's just looking at
the impermanence of the outer universe, you know, the universe in which each one of us
exists or feel we exist and share. The impermanence of not only the outer universe in which we
exist, but each one of us, the impermanence of ourselves and every being that exists in
this world at this time, every being who's come before us, every being who will come
after we're long gone. So the impermanence of all the beings who exist in the universe.
And that even though then, you know, the third really big homework is to really contemplate
the impermanence of, or not the impermanence, but the uncertainty even of when we'll die,
we might know that we're impermanent and it might be obvious that we might die, but that
we don't know when that will be, where it will be, how it will be. So as far as the impermanence
of the outer universe, again, I don't have the time nor do I have the memory to go through
every detail that the Buddha laid out in just how this, you know, the Buddha taught this
universe in which we exist, that feel we exist in this moment. It wasn't always here. And
the Buddha really lays out, you can find this like in words of my perfect teacher, in the
commentaries on the word of my perfect teacher, in many different, you know, places, the
description
of just literally how this universe wasn't always here. And these in in between the moment
of not being coming into existing, developing, kind of sustaining, decaying, and then just
completely releasing into emptiness into space again, these immeasurably, I mean, inconceivable
for us spans of time in which this whole universe has sprung into being and currently existing
and will come to an end. It's like this world itself, this solar system, this planet, even
if we're looking at the more kind of Western scientific vision wasn't always here. We weren't
always here. And also, this solar system, this galaxy will at some point fall apart.
So the point here, the Buddha is really getting us that is to really look at these like think
about it. But the real point, I think of the of really looking at the impermanence of the
outer universe is not only is it just this universe, but all the infinite universes that
have ever sprung forth out of pure space. No matter how long they've existed, they all
don't last forever. So within that, right, there's just even this, this world, our own
little lives, it's just the twinkling of an eye. But again, not just thinking it, but
I'm just trying to like, for myself, and hopefully you kind of kind of reflect a little bit on
that. The impermanence of all we beings who exist in the universe. Again, all of us, no
matter where, like the Buddha pointed out many times, we're all bound to die. You know,
like there's this, in one of the sutras where as a woman whose son has died, and she's asking
the Buddha to please bring him back. And then he said, you know, you go to every house and
ask if if anyone has ever not experienced death. So we're just really thinking about that.
Think about all those we've known in our lives who are gone. Think about all those who've
come before us who are gone.
Not only kind of we kind of more ordinary beings, you know, pass away, but even the great holy
beings have passed away. Like even like all just think within this fortunate Kalpa, Buddha
Shakyamuni came forth, but before him, other Buddhists have come. They've had whole retinues.
Their profound teachings have spread and been practiced, ripened many beings to, you know,
our hood hood and bodhisattvas and onward. And nothing of their teachings remains, not
to mention themselves in the ordinary sense. And then within this time of the teachings
of Buddha Shakyamuni and the world, even Buddha Shakyamuni displayed Maha Parinirvana passed
away. Thankfully those teachings remain. So many of the great masters, you know, who even
had the power, you know, to turn fire into water, water into fire, walk through mountains,
you know, fly through space. They've all displayed passing on as well.
So the impermanence of ordinary beings, the impermanence of holy beings, the impermanence
of powerful beings, such as like even the gods Indra and so on. Even the gods are subject
to death. No matter how powerful, even within our humanity, these, you know, all kinds of
great emperors and empires have come and gone, had great power and great renown. And now
maybe there's so many that no one even knows the name of or maybe only the name of.
And of course, then there's also other, you know, ways that are maybe a little bit more
direct for ourselves. Some of these are just kind of really looking in the vista, looking
in every direction, just seeing how impermanence, how everything is always changing, never stopping
,
here in an instant, gone in a flash, including other things we can look at, you know, such
as looking at the seasons, looking at the minutes, one minute passes to the next minute, the
hours go by, the sun rises, the sun sets, days go by, moons go by, years go by, life goes
by, you know, like sands in the hourglass, so are the days of our lives. Our communities,
you know, you think of even within our own sangha or within our families, our neighborhoods,
our circles of friends and life, just looking at that, how much has changed from the times
we were little kids up until teenagers, up until, I don't know, we're all at different
stages of our lives, but, you know, the people who are around us and important at every stage
of our lives, where are they now? And what are our relationships now? So looking just
at that, just seeing like how much have just our own communities changed, like even within
our own sangha right now, how many people who were here 5, 10, 2, 20 or more years ago,
how many are still with us? How many are, you know, being born too? And then our relationships,
the changeability of just our relationships, of like this, our situations with each other,
the ways in which we relate, relate to each other as friends, whether it's a friendly
connection, trusting connection, or a more, you know, challenging kind of connection,
how much that can change. If we just think for ourselves, maybe people who we met and
we had a lot of like hard knocks and misunderstandings and bumping up against each other and
challenges
with, you know, understanding and patience and all those things. And now who knows, we
all think can know that that can easily change into deep, close, trusting appreciation and
friendship. And likewise, it can go equally the other way to go from trusting, close relationship
where we share a lot, and then things change. Good fortune can end in poverty. Poverty can
lead to fortune. Everything's always coming, going, everything that comes together ends
in separation. Everything built up will be dispersed. These are the truths, the facts
of life, the teachers, the Buddha's pointed us towards. And then it's important to I think
even within our own practice, we all experience change and impermanence and instability. We
can have really, really clear, lucid, heartfelt practice. We can have a practice session where
it's very dull, heavy, uninspired. You know, so even within the continuum of our own practice,
we all firsthand experience those changes between clarity and confusion, trust and doubt, you
know, lesser and greater degrees of joy, devotion, bodhicitta, you know, that's heart for it.
But the important part as practitioners, right, with all of this is we're looking at all of
this and we're continuing to practice to reach what? To reach the changeless state, to reach
what's true and beautiful, the holy dharma, you know, so just remembering too that the
reason we're practicing is to move beyond samsara. With bodhicitta, of course, you know, not as
an escape, but to recognize within all of this change, we need to witness that change.
We need to witness impermanence and kind of the unreliability of appearances as long as
we have ignorance, hope and fear. And we need to keep practicing with our courage and commitment,
you know, because of course we all know it, but the more we look at these kind of facts
and like the four thoughts, the more we have a heartfelt sense of our own mortality and
how precious this moment is and of the inevitability of karma and really feel and see in our own
direct perception how samsara is never perfect. So we're trying to move beyond samsara, turn
our mind toward the dharma for that reason.
So like the Buddha said, it's very famous, we've said it many times, the beautiful quote
of how the Buddha said, "Of all the footprints of the animals, the elephants is supreme."
Of all the kind of mental investigations we could do, impermanence is supreme. The mighty
giant elephant's footprint is the biggest, deepest mix, the biggest impression among
all the animals and contemplating, investigating the truth of impermanence in every aspect
of our lives. And again, not only having that be an intellectual thing, but feeling that
truth is supreme, the Buddha said. That's why it's because it's pointing our mind towards
the dharma, turning our mind towards the dharma.
So I thought, you know, maybe in another time we can look a little bit more at karma, how
karma happens, interdependence, but the point too, like Mipham Rinpoche says, and many again,
many of the great masters, our own precious teachers, turning our mind toward the dharma
through the method of really seeing the reality to our own ordinary sentient being perception,
looking at impermanence is going to reveal to us, it's the doorway to having a direct
perception of the great emptiness, the great emptiness, you know, that's beyond any conception,
the Dharmakaya state of our own mind, the nature of everything of all phenomena that
appears, you know, like the Buddha says, you know, there's also a famous quote, like, clouds,
fire rings, etc. Thus are all compounded things, illusory, a web of interdependence. And when
we look at interdependence, where does it begin? Where does it end? That we know we
can look at another time. But the point here also is that I want to follow is that thread
of how looking at impermanence can usher our minds into the direct perception to our ordinary
minds of the great emptiness. And then there's just a beautiful quote from the Buddha. That's
along those lines of kind of the benefit. And we're looking here at the benefits of
really taking to heart impermanence, starting to reveal to our ordinary minds, the great
emptiness, the great Dharmakaya, ground, and our Buddha nature, right? So I'm reading this
from Tinley Norbu's book, the Cascading Waterfall of Nectar, which is a commentary on the Dajam
Tarasonundra, but he lists from the Sutra of Parinirvana. So from the Buddha. For whoever
harvests fields, the best is to have found a field with crops. Among all impressions,
the best is the perception of impermanence and death. Why? Because the perception of
the three realms will be diminished. Meaning that, obviously, like I think a lot of what
I was just trying to go over, the more we look at the nature of it, the less we see
it as being permanent, the less we see it as permanent, we realize the illusory nature
of it all and kind of soften our assumptions and habitual patterns of thinking things are
solid, permanent, independent. And then furthermore, he gives another quote from the Buddha from
the Sutra of revealing the three Kayas. "Dharmakaya is the permanence of the essential nature as
it is. Sambhogakaya is constant permanence. Narmakaya is uninterrupted permanence." Pointing
our mind toward direct perception of the true nature of the three Kaya state. To the Dharma,
turning our mind towards the Dharma. So then I'll say there's another beautiful quote here
from the Uttara Tantra. "The Lord of Dharma, the Dharma, annihilates the demon of death
in permanence." Why? Because the Dharma is unborn and it is thus the permanent protector
of the world. And then I'll just read one more from the Uma Jhukpa. "Body of peace, the wish
granting tree, ever radiant, like a wish fulfilling jewel with no conception, permanently endures
in this world until all beings are liberated." So again, we're just pointing out, the Buddha's
pointing out, through really taking the heart in permanence, looking at change, looking at
how everything is ceaselessly ceasing, always changing, never for an instant still in any
way, be it form, perception, conception, etc. By really seeing that, feeling that, bringing
that home to our own fleeting life and never knowing for a moment when it will end, how
it will end, where it will end, none of that's guaranteed. Really feeling that. Maybe even
putting ourselves in situations where we feel that mortality. Not putting ourselves in danger,
but feeling that. Like for me, sometimes waking up early, early in the morning, where none
of the usual is happening in those really special times before dawn, sometimes I really
comes home to me then. I'm not saying that's the same for everyone. But don't shy away
from it. Look for it. And again, think of our Guru, think of the undying, great, ever
present, all transcending wisdom, compassion, love and blessings of the Buddha, of Guru
Rinpoche, who are pointing out that same nature in our own mind and heart. Maybe I'll just
stop my moment there. And again, all of this is just a little reminder for us each to kind
of really not ignore what our teachers have been telling us. Really look at impermanence
again and again and again and again, like they say. So we feel it, see it and help us
again. Then look at karma and interdependence, which is totally reliant upon impermanence
and the great emptiness state. We'll just be silent, just rest with that for a few moments
and then with that, along with again, our joy, our appreciation, our courage and commitment
and big, vast bodhicitta aspirations with confidence in the purity state of reality,
we'll continue with our nundra practice itself. Thank you.